---
date: "2011-09-28T12:04:56Z"
tags:
- planetkde
- kde
- shaastra
title: Shaastra
---

In India, we have 16 premier [engineering institutes][]. They go by the
name of IIT (Indian Institute of Technology), and are considered one of
top engineering colleges in India.

In a couple of hours, I'll be flying down to [IIT Madras][] to attend
their annual technical festival: [Shaastra][]. I've been invited to
conduct a [hackfest][], whose primary objective would be to introduce
people to the world of KDE. From what I know, there are 25 people signed
up right now.

By the looks of it this 3 day hackfest (29th September - 1st October) is
going to be amazingly exhausting and rewarding. If there any KDE
developers in Chennai, please stop by! I could use your help.

Apart from me (KDE), we have [Yuvi Panda][] coming on behalf of
Wikimedia. Yuvi is also a GNOME developer who works on [Cheese][].
Additionally we have [a developer][] from Drupal, and a [hardware
hacker][] who is going to help everyone twist some wires with
[Arduino][].

What to expect
==============

My main focus is going to be bug fixing, so I'm on a lookout for simple
bugs that can be fixed by new comers. So far I've made a list of around
15 bugs. Quite a few of them are from my note taking application,
[Notably][]. So far, I have junior jobs from Telepathy, Nepomuk,
Soprano, Yakuake, Choqok(maybe), and Parley. If anyone knows any simple
bugs or Junior Jobs, please let me know.

I doubt this event will be as big as [conf.kde.in][] was. But I'm still
hoping to get quite a few Indian students involved with KDE.

I've already prepared a virtual box instance which runs KDE trunk, so
they should be able to skip the initial hassle of setting up a KDE
Development environment.

Lets see how it goes :)

  [engineering institutes]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Institutes_of_Technology
  [IIT Madras]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Institute_of_Technology_Madras
  [Shaastra]: http://www.shaastra.org/2011/main/home/
  [hackfest]: http://www.shaastra.org/2011/main/events/Hackfest/
  [Yuvi Panda]: http://yuvi.in/
  [Cheese]: http://live.gnome.org/Cheese/
  [a developer]: http://pratul.in/
  [hardware hacker]: http://www.priyakuber.in/
  [Arduino]: http://www.arduino.cc/
  [Notably]: http://vhanda.in/blog/2011/09/notably-v0.3/
  [conf.kde.in]: http://conf.kde.in
